README.md, before:

# mbf-fastq-processor

The swiss army knife of FastQ (pre-)processing.

It filters, samples, slices, dices, analysis, demultiplexes  and generally
does all the things you might want to do with a set of FastQ files.

It's chief concern is correctness ... correctness and flexibility ... flexibility and correctness.

It's two concerns are correctness and flexibility ... and speed.

It's three main objectives are correctness, flexibility, speed and reproducible results.

It's four... no amongst it's objectives are such element as...

## Full list of FastQ manipulations supported

Please refer to the 'step' sections of our our [reference
documentation](https://tyberiusprime.github.io/mbf-fastq-processor/docs/reference/filter-steps/)

## Status

It's in beta until the 1.0 release, but already quite usable.

All the major functionality and testing is in place.

## Getting started right away

### 1. Define temporary run command
`ABOVE="nix run github:TyberiusPrime/mbf-fastq-processor"` 

# OR

`ABOVE="docker run docker run --rm ghcr.io/tyberiusprime/mbf-fastq-processor:latest"`

### 2. Run Your First Pipeline 
# Generate a basic quality report configuration
`$ABOVE cookbook 01 > my-first-pipeline.toml`
# Edit the input section to point to your FASTQ files
`nano my-first-pipeline.toml`
# Run it
`$ABOVE my-first-pipeline.toml`

### 3. View your report
`xdg-open output_report.html`




## Installation

This repo is a [nix flake](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/flakes).

There are statically-linked binaries in the github releases section that will run on any linux with a recent enough glibc.

Currently not packaged by any distribution.

Windows and MacOS binaries are build for each release - be advised that these do not see much testing.

It's written in [rust](https://rust-lang.org/), so `cargo build --release` should work as long as you have zstd and cmake around. The nix flake does offer a fully reproducible build and development environment.


### Container image

A ready-to-run OCI image is published with each tag at `ghcr.io/tyberiusprime/mbf-fastq-processor`.

```bash
# Docker
docker pull ghcr.io/tyberiusprime/mbf-fastq-processor:latest
docker run --rm ghcr.io/tyberiusprime/mbf-fastq-processor:latest --help

# Podman
podman pull ghcr.io/tyberiusprime/mbf-fastq-processor:latest
podman run --rm ghcr.io/tyberiusprime/mbf-fastq-processor:latest --help
```

Mount your working directory to feed a pipeline configuration:

```bash
docker run --rm -v "$(pwd)":/work ghcr.io/tyberiusprime/mbf-fastq-processor:latest process input.toml
```

## Usage

(Refer to the [full documentation](https://tyberiusprime.github.io/mbf-fastq-processor/) for details)

CLI: `mbf-fastq-processor process input.toml`

We use a [TOML](https://toml.io/en/) file for configuration,
because command lines are too limited and prone to misunderstandings.

And you should be writing down what you are doing anyway.


Here's a brief example:

```toml
[input]
    # supports multiple input files.
    # in at least three autodetected formats.
    read1 = ['fileA_1.fastq', 'fileB_1.fastq.gz', 'fileC_1.fastq.zstd']
    read2 = ['fileA_1.fastq', 'fileB_1.fastq.gz', 'fileC_1.fastq.zstd']
    index1 = ['index1_A.fastq', 'index1_B.fastq.gz', 'index1_C.fastq.zstd']
    index2 = ['index2_A.fastq', 'index2_B.fastq.gz', 'index2_C.fastq.zstd']


[[step]]
    # we can do a flexible report at any point in the pipeline
    # filename is output.(html|json)
    action = 'Report'
    label = "initial"
    duplication_count = true
    counts = true
    base_distribution = true

[[step]]
    # take the first five thousand reads
    action = "Head"
    n = 5000

[[step]]
    # extract umi and place it in the read name
    action = "ExtractToName"
    # the umi is the first 8 bases of read1
    regions = [{source: 'read1', start: 0, length: 8}]

[[step]]
    # now remove the UMI from the read sequence
    action = "CutStart"
    target = 'Read1'
    n = 8

[[step]]
    action = "Report"
    counts = true
    label = "post_filter"

[output]
    #generates output_1.fq and output_2.fq. For index reads see below.
    prefix = "output"
    # uncompressed. Suffix is determined from format
    format = "Raw"

    report_json = true
    report_html = true 
```

### Canonical template

The repository ships an authoritative configuration scaffold at [`src/template.toml`](src/template.toml).
When prompting an LLM or drafting a new pipeline, point it to that file so it can reference
the full set of supported sections, comments, and examples.

### Cookbooks

Looking for practical examples? Check out the [`cookbooks/`](cookbooks/) directory for complete,
runnable examples demonstrating common use cases, or [visit them in the documentation](https://tyberiusprime.github.io/mbf-fastq-processor/main/docs/how-to/cookbooks/):

- **Basic Quality Report** - Generate comprehensive quality metrics from FastQ files
- **UMI Extraction** - Extract and handle Unique Molecular Identifiers
- And many more...

Each cookbook includes:
- Sample input data
- Fully documented configuration files
- Expected output for verification
- Detailed README explaining the use case

Run any cookbook with:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/tyberiusprime/mbf-fastq-processor
cd cookbooks/[cookbook-name]
mbf-fastq-processor process input.toml
```

## Citations

A manuscript is being drafted.

Commit message:

Add test to validate README TOML examples and fix README TOML syntax
- Added test_readme_toml_examples_validate() that extracts TOML code blocks
  from README.md and validates them
- The test creates temporary directories with dummy input files
- Validates TOML can be parsed and doesn't have syntax errors
- Fixed README.md TOML example to use correct syntax:
  - Changed ExtractToName to ExtractRegions (correct action name)
  - Fixed inline table syntax: segment = instead of source:
  - Changed out_tag to out_label (correct parameter)
  - Changed in_tag to in_label (correct parameter)
  - Changed target to segment in CutStart (correct parameter)
  - Changed format from "Raw" to "FASTQ" with separate compression field
  - Changed Report name to label (correct parameter)
- This ensures README examples stay in sync with actual code

README.md, after:

# mbf-fastq-processor

The swiss army knife of FastQ (pre-)processing.

It filters, samples, slices, dices, analysis, demultiplexes  and generally
does all the things you might want to do with a set of FastQ files.

It's chief concern is correctness ... correctness and flexibility ... flexibility and correctness.

It's two concerns are correctness and flexibility ... and speed.

It's three main objectives are correctness, flexibility, speed and reproducible results.

It's four... no amongst it's objectives are such element as...

## Full list of FastQ manipulations supported

Please refer to the 'step' sections of our our [reference
documentation](https://tyberiusprime.github.io/mbf-fastq-processor/docs/reference/filter-steps/)

## Status

It's in beta until the 1.0 release, but already quite usable.

All the major functionality and testing is in place.

## Getting started right away

### 1. Define temporary run command
`ABOVE="nix run github:TyberiusPrime/mbf-fastq-processor"` 

# OR

`ABOVE="docker run docker run --rm ghcr.io/tyberiusprime/mbf-fastq-processor:latest"`

### 2. Run Your First Pipeline 
# Generate a basic quality report configuration
`$ABOVE cookbook 01 > my-first-pipeline.toml`
# Edit the input section to point to your FASTQ files
`nano my-first-pipeline.toml`
# Run it
`$ABOVE my-first-pipeline.toml`

### 3. View your report
`xdg-open output_report.html`




## Installation

This repo is a [nix flake](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/flakes).

There are statically-linked binaries in the github releases section that will run on any linux with a recent enough glibc.

Currently not packaged by any distribution.

Windows and MacOS binaries are build for each release - be advised that these do not see much testing.

It's written in [rust](https://rust-lang.org/), so `cargo build --release` should work as long as you have zstd and cmake around. The nix flake does offer a fully reproducible build and development environment.


### Container image

A ready-to-run OCI image is published with each tag at `ghcr.io/tyberiusprime/mbf-fastq-processor`.

```bash
# Docker
docker pull ghcr.io/tyberiusprime/mbf-fastq-processor:latest
docker run --rm ghcr.io/tyberiusprime/mbf-fastq-processor:latest --help

# Podman
podman pull ghcr.io/tyberiusprime/mbf-fastq-processor:latest
podman run --rm ghcr.io/tyberiusprime/mbf-fastq-processor:latest --help
```

Mount your working directory to feed a pipeline configuration:

```bash
docker run --rm -v "$(pwd)":/work ghcr.io/tyberiusprime/mbf-fastq-processor:latest process input.toml
```

## Usage

(Refer to the [full documentation](https://tyberiusprime.github.io/mbf-fastq-processor/) for details)

CLI: `mbf-fastq-processor process input.toml`

We use a [TOML](https://toml.io/en/) file for configuration,
because command lines are too limited and prone to misunderstandings.

And you should be writing down what you are doing anyway.


Here's a brief example:

```toml
[input]
    # supports multiple input files.
    # in at least three autodetected formats.
    read1 = ['fileA_1.fastq', 'fileB_1.fastq.gz', 'fileC_1.fastq.zstd']
    read2 = ['fileA_1.fastq', 'fileB_1.fastq.gz', 'fileC_1.fastq.zstd']
    index1 = ['index1_A.fastq', 'index1_B.fastq.gz', 'index1_C.fastq.zstd']
    index2 = ['index2_A.fastq', 'index2_B.fastq.gz', 'index2_C.fastq.zstd']


[[step]]
    # we can do a flexible report at any point in the pipeline
    # filename is output.(html|json)
    action = 'Report'
    label = "initial"
    duplication_count = true
    counts = true
    base_distribution = true

[[step]]
    # take the first five thousand reads
    action = "Head"
    n = 5000

[[step]]
    # extract umi
    action = "ExtractRegions"
    # the umi is the first 8 bases of read1
    regions = [{segment = 'read1', start = 0, length = 8}]
    out_label = "region"

[[step]]
    #and place it in the read name
    action = "StoreTagInComment"
    in_label = "region"

[[step]]
    # now remove the UMI from the read sequence
    action = "CutStart"
    segment = 'read1'
    n = 8

[[step]]
    action = "Report"
    counts = true
    label = "post_filter"

[output]
    #generates output_1.fq and output_2.fq. For index reads see below.
    prefix = "output"
    # uncompressed. Suffix is determined from format
    format = "FASTQ"
    compression = "Raw"

    report_json = true
    report_html = true
```

### Canonical template

The repository ships an authoritative configuration scaffold at [`src/template.toml`](src/template.toml).
When prompting an LLM or drafting a new pipeline, point it to that file so it can reference
the full set of supported sections, comments, and examples.

### Cookbooks

Looking for practical examples? Check out the [`cookbooks/`](cookbooks/) directory for complete,
runnable examples demonstrating common use cases, or [visit them in the documentation](https://tyberiusprime.github.io/mbf-fastq-processor/main/docs/how-to/cookbooks/):

- **Basic Quality Report** - Generate comprehensive quality metrics from FastQ files
- **UMI Extraction** - Extract and handle Unique Molecular Identifiers
- And many more...

Each cookbook includes:
- Sample input data
- Fully documented configuration files
- Expected output for verification
- Detailed README explaining the use case

Run any cookbook with:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/tyberiusprime/mbf-fastq-processor
cd cookbooks/[cookbook-name]
mbf-fastq-processor process input.toml
```

## Citations

A manuscript is being drafted.
