docs/content/docs/reference/tag-steps/tag/TagDuplicates.md, before:

### FilterDuplicates

```toml
[[step]]
    action = "TagDuplicates"
    false_positive_rate = 0.00001 #
            # the false positive rate of the filter.
            # 0..1
    seed = 59 # required!
    segment = "All" # Any of your input segments, or 'All'
    label = "dups"

[[step]]
    action = "FilterByBoolTag"
    label = "dups"
    keep_or_remove = "Remove" # Keep|Remove
```

Tag duplicates (2nd onwards) from the stream using a [Cuckoo filter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cuckoo_filter).

That's a probabilistic data structure, accordingly there's a false positive rate,
and a tunable memory requirement.

Needs a seed for the random number generator, and a segment
to know which reads to consider for deduplication (filters the complete molecule, like
all other filters of course).

The lower you set the false positive rate, the higher your memory requirements will be.
0.00001 might be a good place to start. 

If you set the false positive rate to 0.0, a HashSet will be used instead,
which will produce exact results, albeit at the expense of keeping a copy of *all* reads in memory! 


Please note our [remarks about cuckoo filters]({{< relref "docs/faq/_index.md" >}}#cuckoo-filtering).

Commit message:

Add flexible sources to TagDuplicates

docs/content/docs/reference/tag-steps/tag/TagDuplicates.md, after:

### FilterDuplicates

```toml
[[step]]
    action = "TagDuplicates"
    false_positive_rate = 0.00001 #
            # the false positive rate of the filter.
            # 0..1
    seed = 59 # required!
    source = "All" # Any input segment, 'All', 'tag:<tag-name>' or 'name:<segment>'
    split_character = "/" # required when using name:<segment>
    label = "dups"

[[step]]
    action = "FilterByBoolTag"
    label = "dups"
    keep_or_remove = "Remove" # Keep|Remove
```

Tag duplicates (2nd onwards) from the stream using a [Cuckoo filter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cuckoo_filter).

That's a probabilistic data structure, accordingly there's a false positive rate,
and a tunable memory requirement.

Needs a seed for the random number generator, and a source
to know which values to consider for deduplication (filters the complete molecule, like
all other filters of course). Sources can be a segment name, `All` (to combine every
segment in the molecule), another tag via `tag:<tag-name>`, or a read name prefix using
`name:<segment>`. The `name:` form requires `split_character` to define where to split the
read name, matching the semantics of `readname_end_char` elsewhere in the tool. When
referencing an existing tag, every tag value is converted into a binary representation
before entering the filter, allowing numeric, boolean, and sequence tags to participate.
Because these prefixes are reserved, the output `label` must not begin with `name:` or
`tag:`.

The lower you set the false positive rate, the higher your memory requirements will be.
0.00001 might be a good place to start. 

If you set the false positive rate to 0.0, a HashSet will be used instead,
which will produce exact results, albeit at the expense of keeping a copy of *all* reads in memory! 


Please note our [remarks about cuckoo filters]({{< relref "docs/faq/_index.md" >}}#cuckoo-filtering).
