cookbooks/README.md, before:

# FastQ Processor Cookbooks

This directory contains practical, real-world examples of using mbf-fastq-processor for common bioinformatics tasks.

## What are Cookbooks?

Each cookbook is a complete, self-contained example that demonstrates how to solve a specific problem or perform a common task. Unlike test cases (which focus on correctness), cookbooks focus on teaching and practical application.

## Structure

Each cookbook contains:
- **README.md**: Explanation of the use case, what the cookbook does, and when to use it
- **input/**: Sample input files (FastQ files, etc.)
- **reference_output/**: Expected output files after processing
- **input.toml**: The pipeline configuration file

## Running a Cookbook

To run any cookbook:

```bash
cd cookbooks/[cookbook-name]
mbf-fastq-processor process input.toml
```

Compare your output with the files in `reference_output/` to verify correct execution.

## Available Cookbooks

### Basic Operations

1. **[basic-quality-report](./01-basic-quality-report/)** - Generate quality reports from FastQ files
2. **[umi-extraction](./02-umi-extraction/)** - Extract UMI (Unique Molecular Identifiers) from reads

### Protocol-Specific

3. **[lexogen-quantseq](./03-lexogen-quantseq/)** - Process Lexogen QuantSeq 3' RNA-seq data (UMI + adapter trimming)

## Contributing

When creating a new cookbook:
1. Create a new directory with a descriptive name
2. Include all four required components (README.md, input/, reference_output/, input.toml)
3. Make the README clear and educational
4. Use small, representative input files (not full datasets)
5. Update this README with a link to your cookbook

Commit message:

Add four new cookbooks for common FastQ processing tasks
Implemented comprehensive cookbooks demonstrating:

1. Quality Filtering (05): Filter reads based on expected error calculation
   - Uses CalcExpectedError and FilterByNumericTag
   - Demonstrates quality-based filtering with configurable thresholds
   - Includes before/after quality reports

2. Adapter Trimming (06): Remove adapters and polyA tails from RNA-seq
   - Uses ExtractPolyTail, ExtractIUPAC, and TrimAtTag
   - Filters short reads after trimming
   - Shows handling of both polyA tails and Illumina adapters

3. Demultiplexing (07): Separate pooled samples by inline barcodes
   - Uses ExtractRegion, HammingCorrect, and Demultiplex
   - Demonstrates barcode error correction with Hamming distance
   - Outputs separate files per sample plus unmatched reads

4. Read Length Filtering (08): Filter and truncate reads by length
   - Uses CalcLength, FilterByNumericTag, and Truncate
   - Shows both minimum/maximum length filtering
   - Demonstrates uniform length truncation

Each cookbook includes:
- Detailed README explaining use case and configuration
- Sample input FastQ files
- Reference output files
- Comprehensive documentation on customization options

Updated cookbooks/README.md to list all cookbooks organized by category.
Fixed dev/_update_cookbooks.py to use correct output path.
Regenerated embedded cookbook data in cookbooks.rs.

cookbooks/README.md, after:

# FastQ Processor Cookbooks

This directory contains practical, real-world examples of using mbf-fastq-processor for common bioinformatics tasks.

## What are Cookbooks?

Each cookbook is a complete, self-contained example that demonstrates how to solve a specific problem or perform a common task. Unlike test cases (which focus on correctness), cookbooks focus on teaching and practical application.

## Structure

Each cookbook contains:
- **README.md**: Explanation of the use case, what the cookbook does, and when to use it
- **input/**: Sample input files (FastQ files, etc.)
- **reference_output/**: Expected output files after processing
- **input.toml**: The pipeline configuration file

## Running a Cookbook

To run any cookbook:

```bash
cd cookbooks/[cookbook-name]
mbf-fastq-processor process input.toml
```

Compare your output with the files in `reference_output/` to verify correct execution.

## Available Cookbooks

### Basic Operations

1. **[basic-quality-report](./01-basic-quality-report/)** - Generate quality reports from FastQ files
2. **[umi-extraction](./02-umi-extraction/)** - Extract UMI (Unique Molecular Identifiers) from reads
5. **[quality-filtering](./05-quality-filtering/)** - Filter reads based on quality scores using expected error
6. **[adapter-trimming](./06-adapter-trimming/)** - Trim adapters and polyA tails from RNA-seq reads
8. **[length-filtering](./08-length-filtering/)** - Filter reads by length and truncate to uniform size

### Protocol-Specific

3. **[lexogen-quantseq](./03-lexogen-quantseq/)** - Process Lexogen QuantSeq 3' RNA-seq data (UMI + adapter trimming)
4. **[phiX-removal](./04-phiX-removal/)** - Remove PhiX spike-in contamination using k-mer counting
7. **[demultiplexing](./07-demultiplexing/)** - Separate pooled samples using inline barcodes with error correction

## Contributing

When creating a new cookbook:
1. Create a new directory with a descriptive name
2. Include all four required components (README.md, input/, reference_output/, input.toml)
3. Make the README clear and educational
4. Use small, representative input files (not full datasets)
5. Update this README with a link to your cookbook
