docs/language-server.md, before:

# mbf-fastq-processor Language Server

The mbf-fastq-processor language server provides IDE features for editing TOML configuration files.

## Features

### 1. Auto-completion with Snippets

The language server provides intelligent auto-completion for:

- **Step actions**: All available transformation step types
  - Basic completions: Just the action name (e.g., type `"Head"` for a simple `action = "Head"`)
  - **Template-based snippets**: Full examples from `template.toml` for common steps
    - `[[step]] - Head`, `[[step]] - Report`, `[[step]] - ExtractRegions`, `[[step]] - ExtractIUPAC`
    - `[[step]] - FilterMinQuality`, `[[step]] - CutStart`, `[[step]] - Truncate`
    - And many more with complete parameter examples
- **Section headers with templates**:
  - `[input]` and `[output]` sections use the canonical `template.toml` examples
  - Each section includes all common parameters with tab stops
  - `[[step]]`, `[options]`, `[barcodes.NAME]` for other sections
- **Configuration keys with snippets**:
  - Input keys: `read1`, `read2`, `index1`, `index2` (with filename placeholders)
  - Output keys: `prefix`, `format`, `compression`, `report_html`, `report_json` (with value suggestions)
  - Step keys: `action`, `segment`, `out_label`, `in_label` (with smart defaults)
  - Options keys: `block_size`, `allow_overwrite`

**Snippet Features**:
- **Template-powered**: Snippets use the same canonical templates as the CLI's `mbf-fastq-processor template` command
- **Tab stops**: Press Tab to jump between placeholders (`${1}`, `${2}`, etc.)
- **Choices**: Some fields offer dropdown choices (e.g., `segment` offers `read1|read2|index1|index2|all`)
- **Default values**: Real examples from template.toml like `${1:fileA_1.fastq}` or `${1:umi}`
- **Multi-line templates**: Section headers and steps insert complete, working examples with proper indentation

### 2. Inline Validation with Precise Error Location

The language server validates your configuration in real-time and shows errors inline:

- **TOML syntax errors**: Catches malformed TOML with accurate line and column information
- **Configuration errors**: Uses the same validation logic as the main tool
- **Smart error positioning**:
  - Errors are highlighted at the relevant section (e.g., `[[step]]`, `[input]`, `[output]`)
  - Step-specific errors point to the exact step number
  - Line and column information extracted from parser errors
- **Type checking**: Validates that required fields are present and have correct types

### 3. Hover Documentation

Hover over any step action or configuration key to see:

- Detailed descriptions of step actions
- Parameter documentation
- Usage hints

## Installation

### Building the Language Server

```bash
cargo build --release --bin mbf-fastq-processor-lsp
```

The binary will be located at `target/release/mbf-fastq-processor-lsp`.

### Visual Studio Code Setup

1. Install the "Generic Language Server" extension or create a custom extension

2. Add to your VS Code settings (`.vscode/settings.json` or user settings):

```json
{
  "genericLanguageServer.servers": [
    {
      "name": "mbf-fastq-processor",
      "command": "/path/to/mbf-fastq-processor-lsp",
      "args": [],
      "languageIds": ["toml"],
      "initializationOptions": {}
    }
  ]
}
```

### Neovim Setup (using nvim-lspconfig)

Add to your Neovim config:

```lua
local lspconfig = require('lspconfig')
local configs = require('lspconfig.configs')

-- Define the config if it doesn't exist
if not configs.mbf_fastq_processor_lsp then
  configs.mbf_fastq_processor_lsp = {
    default_config = {
      cmd = {'/path/to/mbf-fastq-processor-lsp'},
      filetypes = {'toml'},
      root_dir = lspconfig.util.root_pattern('.git', 'input.toml'),
      settings = {},
    },
  }
end

-- Enable the LSP for TOML files (you might want to check if it's an mbf config)
lspconfig.mbf_fastq_processor_lsp.setup{
  on_attach = function(client, bufnr)
    -- Your on_attach function here
  end,
}
```

### Helix Setup

Add to your `~/.config/helix/languages.toml`:

```toml
[[language]]
name = "toml"
language-servers = ["mbf-fastq-processor-lsp"]

[language-server.mbf-fastq-processor-lsp]
command = "/path/to/mbf-fastq-processor-lsp"
```

### Emacs Setup (using lsp-mode)

Add to your Emacs config:

```elisp
(require 'lsp-mode)

(add-to-list 'lsp-language-id-configuration '(toml-mode . "toml"))

(lsp-register-client
 (make-lsp-client :new-connection (lsp-stdio-connection "/path/to/mbf-fastq-processor-lsp")
                  :major-modes '(toml-mode)
                  :server-id 'mbf-fastq-processor-lsp))
```

## Usage

Once configured, the language server will automatically activate when you open a TOML file.

### Snippet Examples

**Creating a complete input section**:
1. Type `[in` and trigger completion
2. Select `[input]` from the list
3. The template expands to:
   ```toml
   [input]
       read1 = ['input_R1.fastq.gz']
   ```
4. The filename is highlighted - just type to replace it
5. Press Tab to move to the next field (or Esc to finish)

**Adding a quality report step**:
1. Type `[[step` or `action =` and trigger completion
2. Select `[[step]] - Report` from the list
3. The complete template (from `template.toml`) expands with all parameters
4. Tab through each field to customize values

**Adding an ExtractIUPAC step**:
1. Select `[[step]] - ExtractIUPAC` from completions
2. Get a complete example with:
   - `action = "ExtractIUPAC"`
   - `out_label`, `search`, `max_mismatches`, `anchor`, `segment` with example values
3. All values are editable placeholders from the canonical template

**Using choice snippets**:
- When you add `segment = `, you'll get a dropdown with `read1|read2|index1|index2|all`
- When you add `compression = `, you'll get `Uncompressed|Gzip|Zstd`
- Choose with arrow keys and Enter, or just type the value

### Tips

1. **File association**: You may want to set up file associations so that `input.toml` or `*.mbf.toml` files are recognized automatically

2. **Trigger completion**: Use your editor's completion trigger (usually `Ctrl+Space`) to see available completions
   - VSCode/Neovim: `Ctrl+Space`
   - Some editors also trigger on `[`, `"`, or `=`

3. **Navigate snippets**: After inserting a snippet:
   - Press `Tab` to jump to the next placeholder
   - Press `Shift+Tab` to go back
   - Press `Esc` to exit snippet mode

4. **View diagnostics**: Errors and warnings will appear inline as you type. Use your editor's diagnostic navigation commands to jump between issues
   - VSCode: `F8` (next error), `Shift+F8` (previous error)
   - Neovim: `]d` and `[d` (with typical LSP config)

5. **Hover for help**: Hover over any step action name to see its documentation

## Troubleshooting

### Language Server Not Starting

Check the language server logs (usually in your editor's LSP log):

```bash
# VSCode: View > Output > Language Server Client
# Neovim: :LspInfo, :LspLog
```

### Completions Not Appearing

- Ensure your cursor is in an appropriate location (after `action = ` or at the start of a line)
- Try manually triggering completion with your editor's completion command

### Validation Not Working

The validation uses `check_for_validation()` which skips file existence checks. This means:
- It will validate configuration structure
- It will NOT complain about missing input files
- It WILL complain about invalid step configurations

## Architecture

The language server is implemented using:

- **tower-lsp**: Async LSP server framework
- **tokio**: Async runtime
- **schemars**: JSON Schema generation for discovering available steps
- **Existing validation**: Reuses mbf-fastq-processor's config validation logic

### Components

- `backend.rs`: Main LSP server implementation
- `completion.rs`: Auto-completion provider
- `diagnostics.rs`: Validation and error reporting
- `hover.rs`: Documentation on hover

## Future Enhancements

Potential future improvements:

1. **Better line number tracking**: Parse TOML with position information to provide exact error locations
2. **Semantic tokens**: Syntax highlighting for step actions, tags, and segments
3. **Code actions**: Quick fixes for common errors
4. **Snippet support**: Smart templates for common step configurations
5. **Go to definition**: Jump to where tags are defined
6. **Rename refactoring**: Rename tags throughout the configuration
7. **Document symbols**: Outline view of configuration sections

Commit message:

LSP: Generate snippets for ALL transformation steps via JSON schema
Enhanced the language server's autocomplete to provide full parameter
snippets for every transformation step type, not just the 13 hardcoded ones.

Key improvements:
- Added `snippet_from_schema()` to extract parameters from JSON schema
- Added `schema_property_to_snippet()` to convert schema types to LSP snippets
- Updated `get_step_action_completions()` to use dual-source strategy:
  * Prioritize template.toml (for steps with documented examples)
  * Fall back to JSON schema extraction (for comprehensive coverage)
- Snippets now include:
  * Required parameters as active tab stops
  * Optional parameters as commented placeholders
  * Enum fields as choice snippets
  * Type-appropriate defaults (strings, numbers, booleans, arrays, objects)

Benefits:
- Complete autocomplete coverage for all transformation types
- Single source of truth via JSON schema
- Better maintainability (no hardcoded action lists)
- Rich IDE experience with parameter hints and choices

Updated docs/language-server.md to reflect the dual-source snippet generation.

docs/language-server.md, after:

# mbf-fastq-processor Language Server

The mbf-fastq-processor language server provides IDE features for editing TOML configuration files.

## Features

### 1. Auto-completion with Snippets

The language server provides intelligent auto-completion for:

- **Step actions**: All available transformation step types
  - Basic completions: Just the action name (e.g., type `"Head"` for a simple `action = "Head"`)
  - **Full snippets for ALL transformation steps**:
    - Snippets prioritize `template.toml` examples when available (for steps with documented examples)
    - Automatically generated from JSON schema for all other steps
    - Every transformation type now has a complete template with parameters
    - Required parameters shown as active fields, optional parameters as comments
- **Section headers with templates**:
  - `[input]` and `[output]` sections use the canonical `template.toml` examples
  - Each section includes all common parameters with tab stops
  - `[[step]]`, `[options]`, `[barcodes.NAME]` for other sections
- **Configuration keys with snippets**:
  - Input keys: `read1`, `read2`, `index1`, `index2` (with filename placeholders)
  - Output keys: `prefix`, `format`, `compression`, `report_html`, `report_json` (with value suggestions)
  - Step keys: `action`, `segment`, `out_label`, `in_label` (with smart defaults)
  - Options keys: `block_size`, `allow_overwrite`

**Snippet Features**:
- **Dual-source generation**:
  - Prioritizes canonical templates from `template.toml` (same as CLI's `mbf-fastq-processor template` command)
  - Falls back to JSON schema extraction for comprehensive coverage of all transformation types
- **Tab stops**: Press Tab to jump between placeholders (`${1}`, `${2}`, etc.)
- **Choices**: Fields with enums offer dropdown choices (e.g., `segment` offers `read1|read2|index1|index2|all`)
- **Default values**: Real examples from template.toml like `${1:fileA_1.fastq}` or schema defaults
- **Multi-line templates**: Section headers and steps insert complete, working examples with proper indentation
- **Smart parameter ordering**: Required parameters first, then optional (as comments)

### 2. Inline Validation with Precise Error Location

The language server validates your configuration in real-time and shows errors inline:

- **TOML syntax errors**: Catches malformed TOML with accurate line and column information
- **Configuration errors**: Uses the same validation logic as the main tool
- **Smart error positioning**:
  - Errors are highlighted at the relevant section (e.g., `[[step]]`, `[input]`, `[output]`)
  - Step-specific errors point to the exact step number
  - Line and column information extracted from parser errors
- **Type checking**: Validates that required fields are present and have correct types

### 3. Hover Documentation

Hover over any step action or configuration key to see:

- Detailed descriptions of step actions
- Parameter documentation
- Usage hints

## Installation

### Building the Language Server

```bash
cargo build --release --bin mbf-fastq-processor-lsp
```

The binary will be located at `target/release/mbf-fastq-processor-lsp`.

### Visual Studio Code Setup

1. Install the "Generic Language Server" extension or create a custom extension

2. Add to your VS Code settings (`.vscode/settings.json` or user settings):

```json
{
  "genericLanguageServer.servers": [
    {
      "name": "mbf-fastq-processor",
      "command": "/path/to/mbf-fastq-processor-lsp",
      "args": [],
      "languageIds": ["toml"],
      "initializationOptions": {}
    }
  ]
}
```

### Neovim Setup (using nvim-lspconfig)

Add to your Neovim config:

```lua
local lspconfig = require('lspconfig')
local configs = require('lspconfig.configs')

-- Define the config if it doesn't exist
if not configs.mbf_fastq_processor_lsp then
  configs.mbf_fastq_processor_lsp = {
    default_config = {
      cmd = {'/path/to/mbf-fastq-processor-lsp'},
      filetypes = {'toml'},
      root_dir = lspconfig.util.root_pattern('.git', 'input.toml'),
      settings = {},
    },
  }
end

-- Enable the LSP for TOML files (you might want to check if it's an mbf config)
lspconfig.mbf_fastq_processor_lsp.setup{
  on_attach = function(client, bufnr)
    -- Your on_attach function here
  end,
}
```

### Helix Setup

Add to your `~/.config/helix/languages.toml`:

```toml
[[language]]
name = "toml"
language-servers = ["mbf-fastq-processor-lsp"]

[language-server.mbf-fastq-processor-lsp]
command = "/path/to/mbf-fastq-processor-lsp"
```

### Emacs Setup (using lsp-mode)

Add to your Emacs config:

```elisp
(require 'lsp-mode)

(add-to-list 'lsp-language-id-configuration '(toml-mode . "toml"))

(lsp-register-client
 (make-lsp-client :new-connection (lsp-stdio-connection "/path/to/mbf-fastq-processor-lsp")
                  :major-modes '(toml-mode)
                  :server-id 'mbf-fastq-processor-lsp))
```

## Usage

Once configured, the language server will automatically activate when you open a TOML file.

### Snippet Examples

**Creating a complete input section**:
1. Type `[in` and trigger completion
2. Select `[input]` from the list
3. The template expands to:
   ```toml
   [input]
       read1 = ['input_R1.fastq.gz']
   ```
4. The filename is highlighted - just type to replace it
5. Press Tab to move to the next field (or Esc to finish)

**Adding a quality report step**:
1. Type `[[step` or `action =` and trigger completion
2. Select `[[step]] - Report` from the list
3. The complete template (from `template.toml`) expands with all parameters
4. Tab through each field to customize values

**Adding an ExtractIUPAC step**:
1. Select `[[step]] - ExtractIUPAC` from completions
2. Get a complete example with:
   - `action = "ExtractIUPAC"`
   - `out_label`, `search`, `max_mismatches`, `anchor`, `segment` with example values
3. All values are editable placeholders from the canonical template

**Using choice snippets**:
- When you add `segment = `, you'll get a dropdown with `read1|read2|index1|index2|all`
- When you add `compression = `, you'll get `Uncompressed|Gzip|Zstd`
- Choose with arrow keys and Enter, or just type the value

### Tips

1. **File association**: You may want to set up file associations so that `input.toml` or `*.mbf.toml` files are recognized automatically

2. **Trigger completion**: Use your editor's completion trigger (usually `Ctrl+Space`) to see available completions
   - VSCode/Neovim: `Ctrl+Space`
   - Some editors also trigger on `[`, `"`, or `=`

3. **Navigate snippets**: After inserting a snippet:
   - Press `Tab` to jump to the next placeholder
   - Press `Shift+Tab` to go back
   - Press `Esc` to exit snippet mode

4. **View diagnostics**: Errors and warnings will appear inline as you type. Use your editor's diagnostic navigation commands to jump between issues
   - VSCode: `F8` (next error), `Shift+F8` (previous error)
   - Neovim: `]d` and `[d` (with typical LSP config)

5. **Hover for help**: Hover over any step action name to see its documentation

## Troubleshooting

### Language Server Not Starting

Check the language server logs (usually in your editor's LSP log):

```bash
# VSCode: View > Output > Language Server Client
# Neovim: :LspInfo, :LspLog
```

### Completions Not Appearing

- Ensure your cursor is in an appropriate location (after `action = ` or at the start of a line)
- Try manually triggering completion with your editor's completion command

### Validation Not Working

The validation uses `check_for_validation()` which skips file existence checks. This means:
- It will validate configuration structure
- It will NOT complain about missing input files
- It WILL complain about invalid step configurations

## Architecture

The language server is implemented using:

- **tower-lsp**: Async LSP server framework
- **tokio**: Async runtime
- **schemars**: JSON Schema generation for discovering available steps
- **Existing validation**: Reuses mbf-fastq-processor's config validation logic

### Components

- `backend.rs`: Main LSP server implementation
- `completion.rs`: Auto-completion provider
- `diagnostics.rs`: Validation and error reporting
- `hover.rs`: Documentation on hover

## Future Enhancements

Potential future improvements:

1. **Better line number tracking**: Parse TOML with position information to provide exact error locations
2. **Semantic tokens**: Syntax highlighting for step actions, tags, and segments
3. **Code actions**: Quick fixes for common errors
4. **Snippet support**: Smart templates for common step configurations
5. **Go to definition**: Jump to where tags are defined
6. **Rename refactoring**: Rename tags throughout the configuration
7. **Document symbols**: Outline view of configuration sections
